[Seven] Tutorial, add a likes button (#7447)
plone/volto: docs/tutorials/add-prisma-database.md

- model a `UrlLike` table backed by SQLite for local development
- expose API endpoints that read and update the like counter
- surface the latest count in a slot component rendered on every page

Prisma is an open-source toolkit that simplifies database access.
You can always fall back to the official docs for deeper dives: https://www.prisma.io/docs/.

```{note}
The main purpose of this tutorial is to demonstrate how to integrate Prisma with Seven.
You can also use the same approach but saving to a Plone REST API endpoint.
It is not meant to be a complete, production-ready implementation of a like button.
You can find the complete code of this tutorial in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/collective/seven-training-addon).
```

## Prerequisites

- A Seven add-on scaffolded with {term}`cookieplone`
- {term}`pnpm` installed and configured for the workspace
- Basic familiarity with TypeScript/React Router code in a Seven project

If you still need an add-on skeleton, follow {doc}`../get-started/create-package` before you continue.

## Install Prisma in your add-on

Run this command from the repo root to install Prisma and its client in your add-on package:

```shell

> pnpm --filter <addon-name> add @prisma/client prisma @types/node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pnpm --filter <add-on-name> add @prisma/client prisma @types/node
```

```

```{warning}

> {term}`pnpm` will require you to approve the builds of this packages, by running `pnpm approve-builds` command.

Reviewer: Only need to term the first instance in a page.

```suggestion
pnpm requires that you approve the builds of this packages, by running `pnpm approve-builds` command.
```

Follow the instructions in the terminal to approve the builds.

```{image} ../_static/approve-builds.jpg
:alt: pnpm approve-builds
:width: 700px
:align: center

> ```

Reviewer: Replace image of text with actual text in a `console` code block.

> In your add-on's `package/<addon-name>/package.json`, add these convenience scripts to work with the Prisma client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your add-on's {file}`package/<add-on-name>/package.json`, add these convenience scripts to work with the Prisma client:
```

```{code-block} json

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/package.json

Reviewer: Interesting. I didn't know you need to escape `<` in captions. It must be a reStructuredText artifact.

```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/package.json
```

"scripts": {

>     // Other scripts...

Reviewer: JSON might not like comments. When you build, does it throw a syntax highlighting warning or error?

Author: I know, it was for keeping it clear to not remove all the existing scripts with these ones. However, I think it's clear with the comment below. I will remove them.

    "prisma:generate": "prisma generate",
    "prisma:db:push": "prisma db push",
    "prisma:migrate": "prisma migrate dev",
    "prisma:studio": "prisma studio"
}
```

> Keep any existing scripts you already have in place—only add the Prisma entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep any existing scripts you already have in place.
Only add the Prisma entries.
```

## Set up the Prisma schema

> Create `packages/<addon-name>/prisma/schema.prisma` with the data model that will hold each page's like counter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create {file}`packages/<add-on-name>/prisma/schema.prisma` with the data model that will hold each page's like counter:
```

```{code-block}

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/prisma/schema.prisma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/prisma/schema.prisma
```

generator client {
  provider = "prisma-client"
  output   = "../generated/prisma"
}

datasource db {
  provider = "sqlite"
  url      = env("DATABASE_URL")
}

model UrlLike {
  id        Int      @id @default(autoincrement())
  pathname  String   @unique
  count     Int      @default(0)
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime @updatedAt
}
```

> This schema configures Prisma to generate its client into `packages/<addon-name>/generated/prisma` and to store data in SQLite by default. Replace the provider if you want to target PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, or any other Prisma-supported database in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This schema configures Prisma to generate its client into {file}`packages/<add-on-name>/generated/prisma` and to store data in SQLite by default.
Replace the provider if you want to target PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, or any other Prisma-supported database in production.
```

The URL of the database is read from the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable.

> The development database will use sqlite for simplicity and it will be stored in a file named `dev.db` in your add-on folder `packages/<addon-name>/prisma/dev.db`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The development database will use SQLite for simplicity.
It will be stored in a file named {file}`dev.db` in your add-on folder {file}`packages/<add-on-name>/prisma`.
```

> Setup an environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up an environment variable:
```

```shell
export DATABASE_URL="file:./dev.db"
```

> or pass down the environment variable when starting your development server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, pass down the environment variable when starting your development server:
```

```shell
DATABASE_URL="file:./dev.db" pnpm dev
```

## Create a reusable Prisma client helper

> Seven will import Prisma from multiple files, so add a tiny helper that keeps one shared instance alive across hot reloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seven will import Prisma from multiple files.
Add a tiny helper that keeps one shared instance alive across hot reloads.
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/lib/prisma.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/lib/prisma.ts
```

import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client';

type GlobalWithPrisma = typeof globalThis & { prisma?: PrismaClient };
const globalForPrisma = globalThis as GlobalWithPrisma;

const prisma = globalForPrisma.prisma ?? new PrismaClient();

if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  globalForPrisma.prisma = prisma;
}

export default prisma;
```

## Generate the Prisma client and push the schema

> Generate the Prisma client code and sync the schema to the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate the Prisma client code and sync the schema to the database with the following commands.
```

```shell

> pnpm --filter <addon-name> run prisma:generate
> pnpm --filter <addon-name> run prisma:db:push

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pnpm --filter <add-on-name> run prisma:generate
pnpm --filter <add-on-name> run prisma:db:push
```

```

> You should now see `packages/<addon-name>/prisma/dev.db` and the generated client files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now see {file}`packages/<addon-name>/prisma/dev.db` and the generated client files.
```

## Create a `/@likes` route to interact with the database

> Create a new file named `api.likes.ts` in the `routes` folder of your add-on (`package/<addon-name>/routes/api.likes.ts`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file named {file}`api.likes.ts` in the {file}`routes` folder of your add-on ({file}`package/<addon-name>/routes/api.likes.ts`).
```

> It will read and increments the like counter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will read and increment the like counter.
```

```{code-block} tsx

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/routes/api.likes.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/routes/api.likes.ts
```

import type { ActionFunctionArgs } from 'react-router';
import prisma from '../lib/prisma';

type LikePayload = { count: number; pathname: string };

// GET /@likes/* → current count for the requested pathname
export async function loader({ params }: ActionFunctionArgs) {
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const like = await prisma.urlLike.findUnique({ where: { pathname } });
  const payload: LikePayload = {
    pathname,
    count: like?.count ?? 0,
  };

  return new Response(JSON.stringify(payload), {
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  });
}

// POST /@likes/* → increment and return the updated record
export async function action({ params }: ActionFunctionArgs) {
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const updatedRecord = await prisma.urlLike.upsert({
    where: { pathname },
    update: { count: { increment: 1 } },
    create: { pathname, count: 1 },
  });

  return new Response(JSON.stringify(updatedRecord), {
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  });
}
```

> Let's declare the route in Seven, first, create a `config` folder in your add-on `package/<addon-name>/config` where you will store all your add-on configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's declare the route in Seven.
First, create a {file}`config` folder in your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config`.
You'll store all your add-on configurations in this folder.

```

> Then, create a file in this folder: `package/<addon-name>/config/routes.ts` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, create a file in this folder {file}`package/<add-on-name>/config/routes.ts` with the following code.
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/config/routes.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/config/routes.ts
```

import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  config.registerRoute({
    type: 'route',
    path: '@likes/*',

>     file: '<addon-name>/routes/api.likes.ts',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    file: '<add-on-name>/routes/api.likes.ts',
```

    options: {
      id: 'likes',
    },
  });

  return config;
}
```

> Replace `<addon-name>` with the actual package directory name you generated with {term}`cookieplone` before using the snippets below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<add-on-name>` with the actual package directory name you generated with cookieplone before using the snippets below.
```

> Wire it up in your add-on's `package/<addon-name>/index.ts` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wire it up in your add-on's {file}`package/<add-on-name>/index.ts` file:
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/index.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/index.ts
```

import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import installRoutes from './config/routes';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  installRoutes(config);

  return config;
}
```

> Accessing the route with a GET request, eg. `/@likes/some/url/path`, will return the number of likes for that current URL, while sending a POST request will increment the like count for that URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessing the route with a GET request, for example, `/@likes/some/url/path`, will return the number of likes for that current URL.
Sending a POST request will increment the like count for that URL.
```

## Create a likes slot

> Create a new file named `LikeButton.tsx` in the `slots` folder of your add-on (`package/<addon-name>/slots/LikeButton.tsx`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file named {file}`LikeButton.tsx` in the {file}`slots` folder of your add-on ({file}`package/<add-on-name>/slots/LikeButton.tsx`).
```

```{code-block} tsx

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/slots/LikeButton.tsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/slots/LikeButton.tsx
```

  const rootData = useRouteLoaderData<RootLoader>('root');
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const rootCount = rootData?.likes?.count ?? 0;
  const fetcherRecord = fetcher.data as { count?: number } | undefined;
  const fetcherCount =
    typeof fetcherRecord?.count === 'number' ? fetcherRecord.count : undefined;
  const likeCount = fetcherCount ?? rootCount;

  return (
    <div className="text-center mt-10">
      <fetcher.Form
        method="post"
        action={`/@likes${pathname}`}
        className="inline"
      >
        <Button
          variant="primary"
          accent
          type="submit"
          isDisabled={fetcher.state === 'submitting'}
        >
          👍 Like ({likeCount})
        </Button>
      </fetcher.Form>
      {typeof fetcherCount === 'number' && (
        <div className="text-green-500 my-2">Thanks for liking!</div>
      )}
    </div>
  );
}

```

This component uses the `useFetcher` hook from `react-router` to send a POST request to the `/@likes/*` route when the button is clicked.
It also uses the `useRouteLoaderData` hook to get the current number of likes for the URL from the root loader data.

> Let's declare the slot in Seven, first, create a `slots.ts` file in the `config` folder of your add-on: `package/<addon-name>/config/slots.ts`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, declare the slot in Seven.
First, create a {file}`slots.ts` file in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config/slots.ts` with the following code:
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/config/slots.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/config/slots.ts
```

import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import LikeButton from '../slots/LikeButton';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  config.registerSlotComponent({
    name: 'LikeButton',
    slot: 'contentArea',
    component: LikeButton,
  });

  return config;
}
```

> Update `packages/<addon-name>/index.ts` again so both the route and the slot install:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update `packages/<add-on-name>/index.ts` again so both the route and the slot install:
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/index.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/index.ts
```

:emphasize-lines: 3, 7
import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import installRoutes from './config/routes';
import installSlots from './config/slots';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  installRoutes(config);
  installSlots(config);

  return config;
}
```

## Provide likes data from the root loader

> Seven lets add-ons contribute data to the root loader through utilities. Create `packages/<addon-name>/config/server.ts` so every request exposes the current like counter to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seven lets add-ons contribute data to the root loader through utilities.
Create {file}`packages/<add-on-name>/config/server.ts` so every request exposes the current like counter to the client.
```

> We will register a utility function of the type `rootLoaderData` that will be called in the root loader of Seven.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, register a utility function of the type `rootLoaderData` that will be called in the root loader of Seven.
```

> 
> Create a new file `server.ts` in the `config` folder of your add-on: `package/<addon-name>/config/server.ts`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file {file}`server.ts` in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config/server.ts` with the following code.
```

```{code-block} ts

> :caption: packages/\<addon-name>/config/server.ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/config/server.ts
```

import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import prisma from '../lib/prisma';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  config.registerUtility({
    name: 'Likes',
    type: 'rootLoaderData',
    method: async ({ path }) => {
      const like = await prisma.urlLike.findUnique({ where: { pathname: path } });
      return {
        likes: {
          pathname: path,
          count: like?.count ?? 0,
        },
      };
    },
  });

  return config;
}
```

Seven will call this function in the root loader, passing the current path as an argument.
The data will be available in the `LikeButton` component via the `useRouteLoaderData` hook.
With this utility in place, `LikeButton` can read the latest count from the root loader, and React Router will revalidate the loader automatically after each POST.

## Run the development server

> Now, you can run the development server of your add-on with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, run the development server of your add-on with the following command:
```

# External Prisma database support for a Seven add-on

This tutorial will show you how to add a small "Like" counter button to any Seven content object.

> It will persist its value in an external database using {term}`Prisma`.

Reviewer: This needs a definition in `plone/documentation`'s glossary before it can be merged. See https://app.readthedocs.org/projects/volto/builds/29831361/#288836463--290.

What is Prisma? I honestly tried to find a definition on Prisma's site, and I fell into a deep rabbit hole of Prisma this-and-that.

```{code-block} tsx
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/routes/api.likes.ts
import type { ActionFunctionArgs } from 'react-router';
import prisma from '../lib/prisma';

type LikePayload = { count: number; pathname: string };

// GET /@likes/* → current count for the requested pathname
export async function loader({ params }: ActionFunctionArgs) {
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const like = await prisma.urlLike.findUnique({ where: { pathname } });
  const payload: LikePayload = {
    pathname,
    count: like?.count ?? 0,
  };

  return new Response(JSON.stringify(payload), {
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  });
}

// POST /@likes/* → increment and return the updated record
export async function action({ params }: ActionFunctionArgs) {
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const updatedRecord = await prisma.urlLike.upsert({
    where: { pathname },
    update: { count: { increment: 1 } },
    create: { pathname, count: 1 },
  });

  return new Response(JSON.stringify(updatedRecord), {
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  });
}
```

Let's declare the route in Seven.

> First, create a {file}`config` folder in your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a {file}`config` folder in your add-on at {file}`package/<add-on-name>/config`.
```

```{code-block} tsx
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/slots/LikeButton.tsx
import type { RootLoader } from 'seven/app/root';
import { Button } from '@plone/components/quanta';
import { useFetcher, useParams, useRouteLoaderData } from 'react-router';

export default function LikeButton() {
  const fetcher = useFetcher();
  const params = useParams();
  const rootData = useRouteLoaderData<RootLoader>('root');
  const pathname = params['*'] ? `/${params['*']}` : '/';
  const rootCount = rootData?.likes?.count ?? 0;
  const fetcherRecord = fetcher.data as { count?: number } | undefined;
  const fetcherCount =
    typeof fetcherRecord?.count === 'number' ? fetcherRecord.count : undefined;
  const likeCount = fetcherCount ?? rootCount;

  return (
    <div className="text-center mt-10">
      <fetcher.Form
        method="post"
        action={`/@likes${pathname}`}
        className="inline"
      >
        <Button
          variant="primary"
          accent
          type="submit"
          isDisabled={fetcher.state === 'submitting'}
        >

>           👍 Like ({likeCount})

Reviewer: Sphinx barfs on emojis. See https://app.readthedocs.org/projects/volto/builds/29831361/#288836463--291.

Maybe use the HTML entity `&#x1F44D;` instead?

Author: Done. It does not render in sphinx, but it does in the app.

        </Button>
      </fetcher.Form>
      {typeof fetcherCount === 'number' && (
        <div className="text-green-500 my-2">Thanks for liking!</div>
      )}
    </div>
  );
}

```

This component uses the `useFetcher` hook from `react-router` to send a POST request to the `/@likes/*` route when the button is clicked.
It also uses the `useRouteLoaderData` hook to get the current number of likes for the URL from the root loader data.

Next, declare the slot in Seven.

> First, create a {file}`slots.ts` file in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config/slots.ts` with the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a {file}`slots.ts` file in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<add-on-name>/config/slots.ts` with the following code:
```

```{code-block} ts
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/config/slots.ts
import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import LikeButton from '../slots/LikeButton';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  config.registerSlotComponent({
    name: 'LikeButton',
    slot: 'contentArea',
    component: LikeButton,
  });

  return config;
}
```

Update `packages/<add-on-name>/index.ts` again so both the route and the slot install:

```{code-block} ts
:caption: packages/\<add-on-name>/index.ts
:emphasize-lines: 3, 7
import type { ConfigType } from '@plone/registry';
import installRoutes from './config/routes';
import installSlots from './config/slots';

export default function install(config: ConfigType) {
  installRoutes(config);
  installSlots(config);

  return config;
}
```

## Provide likes data from the root loader

Seven lets add-ons contribute data to the root loader through utilities.
Create {file}`packages/<add-on-name>/config/server.ts` so every request exposes the current like counter to the client.
Next, register a utility function of the type `rootLoaderData` that will be called in the root loader of Seven.

> Create a new file {file}`server.ts` in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<addon-name>/config/server.ts` with the following code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new file {file}`server.ts` in the {file}`config` folder of your add-on at {file}`package/<add-on-name>/config/server.ts` with the following code.
```
